I had some scrap SSiC plate (pressureless sintered silicon carbide) lying around, and the intrusive thought struck: I should machine something from it. Thus began my hardest project so far (pun intended). I liked the sound of creating the hardest ring in the world.

I wanted something with at least moderate geometric complexity, ideally with an embedded NFC chip. Since I had access to a benchtop lapping grinder (NEED TO REVIEW NAME), I figured adding external facets would be fairly straightforward. After some CAD experiments, I settled on five partial-face facets (hexagons = bestagons) with large external fillets.

Starting from an 11–12 mm thick SiC plate, the order of operations went as follows:

<RingProgression> 
(CAPTION) Starting from a blank (left), adding outer fillets (middle) and facets (right).

Firstly, the blank drilling. This was by far the most arduous part of the project. The diamond bits dulled almost instantly—probably not surprising given my AliExpress sourcing. The wear likely caused the external chipping at the end of the outer cut; fortunately, it wasn’t deep enough to be visible after the later facing step.

The setup was very ad-hoc: a laser-cut acrylic coolant basin and plate, plus a simple diaphragm pump to flood the tool. Keeping diamonds cool is critical, since despite the saying, they aren’t forever when exposed to thermal shock and high heat. By keeping the plate clamped, I could maintain reasonably aligned inner and outer circular profiles. However, due to chipping and rapid tool wear, the outer surfaces ended up tapered.

<Blank_drilling>
(CAPTION) Drilling out inner hole with small coring diamond bit.

<Rough_blank>
(CAPTION) Rough ring blank after removal with large coring diamond bit.

For the turning operations, I picked up a surprisingly good AliExpress diamond die grinder bit. I then milled a steel tool holder and aluminium clamps to mount my die grinder on the lathe toolpost. Spinning both the tool and the workpiece reduced cutting forces and distributed wear more evenly. This was particularly important, since ceramics tend to fracture explosively under stress—especially cheaper materials like my SiC plate. My strategy was low workpiece RPM and high tool RPM.

To handle the stiffness and brittleness of SiC, I gripped the ring blank in the lathe with a 3D-printed plastic sleeve that matched the external taper from the drilling step. While the thickness wasn’t completely uniform, the PLA was flexible enough that the jaws could center the piece fairly well.

<Sleeve_jig>
(CAPTION) External gripping sleeve with slots for parallels.

Using parallels as a starting datum, I faced one surface, flipped the piece, and faced again. Then I carefully bored the inner diameter, leaving two flat, parallel faces perpendicular to the bore axis.

<Gripped_externalring>
(CAPTION) Getting ring squared up after the first facing job.

With this consistency established, I moved on to the external (circumferential) turning operations. For these, I machined an aluminium clamping jig; this compressed a tapered plastic sleeve into the ring’s inner bore, pressing the ring against a flat shoulder. Thanks to the perpendicularity established earlier, this ensured the inner and outer (circumferential) surfaces would stay parallel. I also drilled and tapped an M8 hex bolt into the back of the aluminum jig, which later served as an alignment point for facet grinding.

<Exploded_ringhold_jig>
(CAPTION) Disassembled ring inner clamping jig, showing compression bolt, plastic compression sleeve, and aluminum tapered rod with locating shoulder.

It took a few iterations to perfect the printed sleeve, but once done it worked reliably. Axial centering on the jig wasn’t flawless, but it was more than sufficient for my needs. On to grinding!

<Grinding_external_gif>

For the fillets, I found another bargain diamond bit (yes, from AliExpress again). To my surprise, things were turning out far better than expected.

<Grinding_radii>
(CAPTION) Lining up cornering bit with workpiece.

<Rounded_ring>
(CAPTION) Ring after boring, facing and filleting.

The last step was grinding the facets. At the start, I’d planned to use the desktop lapping grinder at work, and went as far as machining a steel fixture that clamped the hex bolt into a slot for alignment. The fixture mounted on the grinder plate, which pressed against a spinning diamond disk.

<Grinding_jig11>
(CAPTION) Ring mounted in facet grinding jig.

<Grinding_jig12>
(CAPTION) Grinding jig mounted on the lapping plate.

But during testing, I was disappointed with the jig’s rigidity and alignment. It allowed deflection, which rounded the facets under cutting loads—which were high when grinding an entire surface at once like on a grinding disk.

This roadblock, like many, made me pause and reconsider. That’s when I realized I could simply use the cylindrical grinding bit (originally bought for the lathe) in the mill, clamping the hex head in the vice for the same datuming effect I’d over-engineered into the steel fixture.

<Mill_faceting>
(CAPTION) Ring with inner holding jig clamped to the mill by the rear/bottom hex bolt.

This worked well, though it was tough on the tool. The mill’s relatively low RPM meant the bit wore down quickly. In fact, I ground the diamonds completely off the tip during the final cut, which caused some rapid heating and burning.

Despite that, the final result was deeply satisfying.

<finished_ring>